Investigating the Relationship Between Depression and Religiosity, Cholesterol, Instrumental Activities of Daily Living Among Elderly Mexican Americans

Abstract

Background: Previous studies have found evidence of associations between depression and various demographic characteristics, health conditions, and religiosity. In this study, we examined the relationship between depression and religiosity, cholesterol level, and instrumental activities of daily living among elderly Mexican Americans.
Methods: KNN imputation with k = 1 is applied to deal with the high proportion of missing values. Next, using general linear hypotheses, we discuss whether daily activities and religiosity can be simplified into fewer groups. We use interaction and mediation analyses to investigate relationships between a subset of covariates and depression. Through diagnostic plots, we investigate the use of transformations to correct for heteroskedasticity. Finally, we apply robust regression with Huber loss to check our final model. 
Results: We found a significant mediation between high blood pressure and high cholesterol, as well as an interaction between high cholesterol and activity. We found evidence of higher depression among those unable to do most activities (2.72, 95% CI: 1.05, 4.38) and among those who are not very religious (0.98, 95% CI: 0.07, 1.89) after adjusting for important covariates. 
Conclusions: The findings of our study are consistent with previous research showing that inability to perform instrumental activities is associated with higher depression, while religiosity is associated with lower depression. Due to the fact that few participants have no religiosity, additional surveys are essential for further investigation of the association between religiosity and depression among the elderly Mexican American population.

Introduction

Depression is a common worldwide mental disorder, with 5.02% of adults affected in 2019 (IHME, 2019). Different from short-term mood fluctuations, recurrent and intense depression may lead to severe health conditions and cause emotional suffering and poor physical functioning (WHO, 2021). The depressive symptoms severity can be measured by the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D), which is a self-report questionnaire consisting of 20 questions about depressive feelings and behaviors in the past week (Radloff, 1977).
Previous research shows evidence of associations between depression and various factors among elderly Mexican Americans, including demographic characteristics like age, gender, marital status, and immigration status (Black et al., 1998; Gonzalez et al., 2001) and health conditions such as diabetes and cognitive impairment (Olvera et al., 2001; Rote et al., 2015). Research in other populations suggests religiosity is associated with lower depression (Stearns et al., 2018). Based on these studies, we hypothesize that elderly Mexican Americans who can do more activities and who are more religious tend to have lower depression, and that health conditions like high cholesterol may affect the relationship between activity level and depression.
To address these hypotheses, we use an observational study with records from 1682 participants that provide information on activity level, personal background, health condition, as well as corresponding CES-D score. Our study examines the association of religiosity and instrumental activities of daily living (Totiadl4) with depression, along with the impact of the interaction between Totiadl4 and high cholesterol, adjusted for important covariates. 
